---
title: Describe the annual maintenance programme for quality ornamental and for hard-wearing utility lawns.
---


> **To include: for a high quality ornamental lawn
and for a hard-wearing utility lawn:
height of cut, frequency of cut, remove
clippings or not; feeding, scarifying, aeration,
top dressing, edging, weed control, control of
named pests and diseases.
Tasks should relate to a 12-month
maintenance programme.** 


`LAWN MAINTENACE`

Describe the annual maintenance programme for quality ornamental and for hard wearing utility lawns.

Mowing as required;
Feeding, high Nitrogen spring & summer; after August high Phosphorus;
Irrigation as required;
Edging as required;
Autumn renovations, scarification, spiking, repairs (humps, hollows, patches, damaged edges);
Top dressing, over seeding.
(This is a programme for a quality lawn.  For hard wearing, less attention is given to this).


`LAWN WEEDS`

`BROADLEAF WEED`

`SELECTIVE HERBICIDE`

`LAWN HOLLOWS`

`LAWN BUMPS`

`LAWN ROLLING`

`LAWN REPAIRS`

`LAWN DIVOTS`

`LAWN THATCH`

`LAWN MOSS`

`MOWING`

`LAWN MOWING`

Seasonal guide to mowing:
March – top with blade set higher than summer height;
April – increase frequency according to weather;
May-August – adjust to summer height & frequency;
August-September – reduce frequency as growth rate slows;
Late September – adjust height to Autumn height;
October-February – occasional topping during milder weather.

Cut:
Height of cut adjusted as needed by season and weather;
Frequency of mowing as required;
Right conditions, dry / switch off dew;
Removal of mowing and composting;
Boxing off clippings (benefits & limitations);
Allowing clippings to “fly” (+ and -).

How to Mow: 
Plan the direction;
Mow when dry;
Scatter worm casts before mowing;
Rake before to lift unwanted growth; 
Move steadily forward;
Always mow at right-angles
Create stripes:

Start

Many homeowners mistakenly cut their lawns once a week.  Grass should be cut when it needs cutting, rather than mowing on an artificially imposed schedule;
Decades of field research and experience have demonstrated that mowing frequency should generally be stepped up to once every five to six days;

Grass Recycling trades off mowing more frequently with actually spending less time and energy on lawn care.  For example, by grass recycling, you are not stopping every five-ten minutes to empty the mower bag, putting clippings into a bag or container, and dragging heavy clippings to the curb.  In fact, grass recycling typically saves 40 percent of the time traditionally spent on lawn chores.

Mowing problems:
Ribbing – narrow, parallel strip caused by cylinder blade at low speed & low number of blades = few cuts;
Washboard effect – irregular waves or corrugations  caused by grass cut always in same direction;
Lacerated & uneven cutting – caused by blunt & incorrectly set blades;
Scalping – caused by surface irregularities.



`LAWN SCARIFYING`

Scarification to remove Thatch:
Thatch: miscellaneous debris lying between the roots and foliage of grass;
Reduces surface evaporation;
Gives springy resilience;
Protects against wear;
Can impede water / fertiliser penetration;
Encourage diseases (fungal).

Scarifying:
Removing Thatch – autumn work, remove & re-seed;
Preventing Thatch;
Raking;
Improving surface drainage & aeration;
Reduce creeping lawn weeds;
Reduce moss.


`LAWN FERTILISER`

`LAWN FEED`

`LAWN AERATION`

Aerating:
Compaction:
Localised;
Reduced passage of air & build up of CO2;
Reduce passage of water & drainage;
Aeration improves surface drainage;
Improves root activity, reduces moss;
Alteration of soil texture by top dressing;
When to aerate:
Spring/summer: spike localised compaction;
September: deeper, general & hollow-tines;
Winter: localised to disperse standing water.
Smaller lawn areas can be manually aerated using a form inserted into the soil.  Insert tines to approximately four inches and push down – or rock back and forth a bit – loosening the soil, and then pull out.  Repeat this process every 10cm until the entire lawn area is covered;
For larger areas machine spikers are available “Big Willy” fish tail, solid or hollow tines available.




`SOLID TINE AERATION`

`HOLLOW TINE AERATION`

`LAWN TOP DRESSING`
> **Identify differences between the maintenance
procedures for utility and fine turf.** 


** SEE TABLE **
