---
title: Name TWO AQUATIC plants from each of the following groups: floating, deep-water, marginal and bog plants.
---


> **Examples could include:
Floating: Stratiotes aloides
Deepwater: Nymphaea ‘Chromatella’
Marginal: Caltha palustris
Bog garden plant: Gunnera manicata** 


`FLOATING AQUATIC PLANT`
Floating plants do not need anchorage in soil. Their presence on the surface reduces the amount of sunlight penetrating the water and keeps the water cooler, discouraging algae. Aim to keep around 50% of the surface clear of vegetation, if necessary by thinning occasionally during the summer.
Introduce floating aquatics to the pool by placing them gently on the water’s surface.  Clumps may need separating first.  One plant per square metre of surface area should be sufficient.  Avoid invasive floating plants.

`DEEP WATER AQUATIC PLANT`

These can be bought as container-grown or bare-rooted plants.  Container-grown plants may need potting into larger containers.  Bare-rooted plants should have old roots and large leaves removed before planting.  Newly planted containers may need to be raised on bricks so the plants are not too deep and any leaves that float on the surface are not submerged.  They are then lowered in stages as their leaves reach the surface, until the appropriate depth is reached.

`MARGINAL PLANT`
These plants are ornamental in flower and foliage and soften the harsh outlines of pools. They are also valuable for shading pool margins where algae may otherwise multiply in the warm, shallow water. For small pools, plant separately in 15cm (6in) containers and re-pot when overcrowded. Heights given indicate length of leaves or flowers above the water surface.
Marginals are grown on the inside edge of the pond, or in a bog garden.  If bought in plastic pots or small baskets, replant into aquatic baskets.  When planting bare-rooted plants in summer, trim back the tops by half and trim the roots back to within 2.5cm (1in) of the crown

`BOG PLANT`
For ground that is always damp, but not permanently waterlogged, bog plants are a good group of plants to consider. These can be planted as part of a specially built bog garden or, if you are lucky enough, in any position in the garden where these conditions are naturally present.
Top 5 plants for the spot:
Primula japonica ‘Miller's Crimson’
Iris ensata
Ligularia ‘Gregynog Gold’
Matteuccia struthiopteris AGM
Rodgersia pinnata ‘Superba’

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  floating-aquatic-plant

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  deep-water-aquatic-plant

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  marginal-plant

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  bog-plant
