---
title: State the meaning of the following terms: symmetry, asymmetry, colour, focal points.
---


> **To include examples of each term in a
garden context and how colour can be used
in garden design to provide unity, adjust
mood and play visual tricks. Uses of focal
points to include: to draw the eye, to
encourage exploration, to distract, to create
false perspective, to provide theme interest.** 


`SYMMETRY`

`ASYMMETRY`
Asymmetry can be ‘messy’ or can have an underlying rhythm or balance.


`MIRROR SYMMETRY`
both sides of the garden match each other


`ROTATIONAL SYMMETRY`
The garden design rotates around a point without distorion


`COLOUR THEORY`

Colour of walls, garden furniture and plants all change the ‘mood’ of the garden.
A garden of blue and analogous colour (colours next to each other on the colour wheel) may convey a restful mood. A garden planted with a mixture of colourful plants might be referred to as a ‘riot’ of colour.
Colour is relative, so one colour is affected by the colours that surround it.
Colour can create a sense of distance (e.g. blue tends to recede).
Colour can create a sense of warmth e.g a terracotta wall might make a seating area look more ‘cosy’ than a white wall.

The bright sun of the Mediterranean tends to bleach out colours, so bright colours tend to be used.
The softer light of northern more temperate climates lends itself to more subtle colours.

`COLOUR HUE`
the actual colour, is it red or blue)


`COLOUR SATURATION`

`COLOUR BRIGHTNESS`

`PRIMARTY COLOUR`

`SECONDARY COLOUR`

`TERTIARY COLOUR`

`COMPLEMENTARY COLOUR`

`CONTRASTING COLOUR`

`COLOUR TONE`
the amount of black


`COLOUR TINT`
the amount of white


`COLOUR TRIAD`

`FOCAL POINT`
Focal points in gardens: statues, tunnels with light at the end, gateways, doorways, buildings, mirrors, specific plants.
Focal points can be lit for emphasis either by artificial light or natural effects of the sun

