---
title: Describe the structure and state the functions of leaves.
---


> **State the primary function of leaves –
photosynthesis.** 


`LEAF`

`LEAF FUNCTION`
primary function of leaves:

Main site of photosynthesis (food production) although this can take place in any areas that contain chlorophyll, e.g., aerial roots of orchids.
Exit point of water (transpiration).


> **Describe: petiole, lamina, veins, and midrib. Leaf
shape, colour and leaf arrangement on the stem –
simple, compound (palmate, pinnate).** 


`LEAF STRUCTURE`

`DICOT LEAF`

`MONOCOT LEAF`

`PETIOLE`
leaf stalk, connecting leaf lamina to the stem.


`LAMINA`
 leaf blade, main area of leaf.


`MIDRIB`
 central main vein on a dicot leaf.


`LEAF VEIN`
network of vascular bundles on dicot leaf.  Parallel veins on monocot.  Bringing water and minerals up, taking products down.


`LEAF MARGIN`
Edge of a leaf.


`STIPULE`
Feature of a leaf.


`LEAF SHAPE`
Leaf shape – monocot, long strap like; dicot variable.
Types of leaves:
Simple (see above) single entire leaf.
Compound – palmate/pinnate, several blades.
Palmate – radiating from one point – not to be confused with the Acer leaf shape.
Pinnate – a linear shape.

Acer – palmately-lobed or palmatipartite


`PINNATELY LOBED LEAF SHAPE`
Refers principally to: entire leaf
Having lobes pinnately arranged on the central axis.
Latin: pinna + lobus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glossary_of_leaf_morphology#/media/File:Leaf_morphology_Pennatilobé.svg

`PALMATE LEAF SHAPE`
Refers principally to: entire leaf
Palm-shaped, i.e., with lobes or leaflets stemming from the leaf base.[4]
Latin: palmatus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glossary_of_leaf_morphology#/media/File:Leaf_morphology_palmate.png

`LEAF COLOUR`

Mostly shades of green due to forms of chlorophyll present in the leaf.  Acts in photosynthesis, and also protects the leaf.
Variegation in leaves can be caused by chimeral (some tissue not producing chlorophyll).
Yellow edge: Elaeagnus x ebbingei “Gilt Edge”.
Yellow patch in centre of leaf: Elaeagnus x ebbingei “Limelight”.
Reflective/blister variegation (air under the epidermis): Pilea cadierei “Aluminium Plant”.
Pigmentation – several different pigments in the leaf or overlapping one another:
Chlorophyll alpha – green.
Chlorophyll beta – green.
Carotenoids – yellows/oranges.
(3 involved in photosynthesis).
Anthocyanins – red/purple/blue.
Pathological – virus present in the leaves causing:
Mosaic patterns – Abutilon “Cannington Peter”.
Vein clearing – Pelargonium peltatum “Sussex Lace”.
Spots – Ligularia tussilaginea “Aureo-maculata”.


`LEAF ARRANGEMENT`
Arrangement of leaves around a stem.


`ALTERNATE LEAF ARRANGEMENT`

`OPPOSITE LEAF ARRANGEMENT`
> **Draw a dicotyledon leaf section to show the
following components epidermis, xylem, phloem,
veins, palisade & spongy mesophyll, cuticle,
guard cells and stomata.** 


undefined

`SPONGY MESOPHYLL`

`PALLISADE CELL`

`STOMATA`

`LEAF STOMATA`

`GUARD CELL`

`LEAF GUARD CELL`
> **Describe how leaves are adapted to perform
other functions - storage/perennation by bulbs,
(Narcissus and Lilium) and water storage
(Sedum), protection by leaf spine (Berberis),
climbing by tendrils (Lathyrus) and twining
petioles (Clematis) and attraction of pollinators by
bracts (Hydrangea).** 


`LEAF ADAPTATION`

Storage/perennation by bulbs (Narcissus and Lilium):


Water storage (Sedum) – thick, waxy, cuticle cells store water in the leaf.

Sedum spectabile “Autumn Joy”.

Protection by leaf spine (Berberis):


Climbing by tendrils (Lathyrus odoratus):



Twisting petioles (Clematis):


`LEAF PERENNATION`

Storage/perennation by bulbs (Narcissus and Lilium):

`BULB`

Storage/perennation by bulbs (Narcissus and Lilium):

`LEAF SPINE`

`LEAF PERENNATION`

Storage/perennation by bulbs (Narcissus and Lilium):

`SUCCULENT`

`SUCCULENT LEAF`

`SUCCULENT PLANT`

`TENDRIL`

`TWINING PETIOLE`

`LEAF BRACT`
Attraction of pollinators by bracts Hydrangea 'Marisii' or H. 'Altona'

