---
title: Define a range of botanical and horticultural terms relating to plant growth.
---


> **Define the botanical terms: ‘annual’, ‘ephemeral’,
‘biennial’ and ‘perennial’ and the horticultural
meanings of ‘annual’, ‘biennial’ and ‘perennial’.
(An example of different meanings is that
Dipsacus fullonum (teasel) is a true biennial,
Erysimum cheirii (wallflower) is used as a biennial
in horticulture but is a perennial).** 


`ANNUAL (BOTANY)`
Plant which completes its LIFE CYCLE in one GROWING SEASON


`EPHEMERAL`
Plant which repeats its LIFE CYCLE several times in one GROWING SEASON


`BIENNIAL (BOTANY)`
Plant which completes its LIFE CYCLE in two GROWING SEASONs


`PERENNIAL (BOTANY)`
Plant which completes its LIFE CYCLE in more than two GROWING SEASONs


`ANNUAL (HORTICULTURE)`
A TRUE ANNUAL (dis. Botany) OR BIENNIAL(dis. Botany) OR PERENNIAL(dis. Botany) GROWN for a SINGLE SEASON.

e.g. BEDDING plants
often perform better in first season, although they continue to live
can be tender perennials


`BIENNIAL (HORTICULTURE)`

`PERENNIAL (HORTICULTURE)`
> **Define the botanical terms: ‘herbaceous’, ‘woody’,
‘evergreen’, ‘semi-evergreen’.** 


`HERBACEOUS`

`WOODY`

`EVERGREEN`
Retains its leaves all year round (some may drop in spring after new leaves have grown).


`SEMI EVERGREEN`
Retains its leaves all year round, BUT can lose them in severe weather conditions.

> **Define the horticultural terms: ‘tender perennial’,
‘half hardy annual’, and ‘hardy annual’. (A ‘tender
perennial’ cannot survive frost; a ‘half hardy
annual’ is sown under protection early in the
season then planted out; a ‘hardy annual’ is sown
in situ).** 


`TENDER PERENNIAL`
A perennial that cannot survive frost.


`HALF HARDY ANNUAL`
A tender annual usually sown under protection early in the season then possibly planted out.
Half-hardy perennials / annuals (tender perennials / annuals);

Will not survive frost and must be brought indoors during the winter;

Examples: Pelargonium, Fuchsia, and Heliotrope;

Individual microclimates and good free-draining soil can make an enormous difference to their ability to survive the winter;

Half-hardy annual plants can survive a couple of brushes with chilly night temperatures (35 – 45ºF) and light frost, but anything colder will turn them to mush;

Just like hardy annuals, the longer they’ve had to get used to the 

`HARDY ANNUAL`
Can be sown in situ

> **Define the terms ‘shrub’ and ‘tree’.** 


`SHRUB`
A woody perennial that has multiple stems from ground level.


`TREE`
A woody perennial that has a single stem/trunk/bole

> **TWO plant examples should be known for EACH
term.** 


[Capsella bursa-pastoris]

[Capsella bursa-pastoris]

[Digitalis grandiflora
Digitalis purpurea]

[Erysimum cheiri
Buxus sempervirens]

[Gaura lindheimeri 'The Bride']

[Erysimum cheiri
Dianthus barbatus]

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  perennial-(horticulture)

[Erysimum cheiri
Buxus sempervirens]

[Erysimum cheiri
Buxus sempervirens]

[Buddleja davidii 'Black Knight']

[Buddleja davidii 'Black Knight']

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  tender-perennial

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  half-hardy-annual

[Primula vulgaris
Viola x wittrockiana]

[Erysimum cheiri
Buxus sempervirens]

[Betula utilis var. jacquemontii
Ilex aquifolium]
