---
title: Describe the structure and state the functions of stems.
---


> **State the primary functions of the stem - holding
leaves and flowers in optimum positions and
transport between roots and leaves** 


`STEM`

`STEM FUNCTION`
## Primary function is to 
### hold leaves and flowers in optimum position and 
### provide a transport link between roots and leaves.

## Also:
### Protection (stem spines/thorns of Crataegus/prickles of Rosa) also used for climbing.


### Storage or perennation:
Corms – Crocus, stem tubers – Begonia, rhizomes – Iris germanica.
 

### Climbing:
Wisteria by twisting.


### Natural vegetative reproduction:
Stolon’s or runners – Fragaria, rhizomes – Festuca rubra, stem tubers – Solanum tuberosum.
   


> **Describe the structure of the stem and state the
functions of its components - internal structures to
include drawing of a transverse section through a
young dicotyledon stem to show the following
components: epidermis, cortex, cambium,
phloem, xylem, pith, vascular bundle and external
structures to include lenticels, nodes, axillary and
apical buds, scars (scale and leaf).** 


`STEM STRUCTURE`

`PITH`
Pith (may be hollow) thin walled cells, with big intercellular air spaces:
Store water and starch allows gaseous exchange.



`STEM CORTEX`
Cortex – 3 layers of differing tissues:
Outer cells have thickened walls providing strengthening of the stem – can contain chloroplast.
Mid-cells are large with large air spaces – they store starch and allow gaseous exchange.
Inner cells – the endodermis single layer of tightly packed cells which store starch and allow solutions to pass from the cortex to the vascular bundle.



`LENTICEL`
See stem-features


`NODE (STEM)`
See stem-features


`INTERNODE`
See stem-features


`APICAL BUD`
See stem-features


`AXILLARY BUD`
See stem-features


`GIRDLE SCAR`
See stem-features


`BUD SCALE`
See stem-features


`LEAF SCAR`
See stem-features


undefined
> **Describe how the stem is adapted to perform
other functions - protection: stem spines (thorns
of Crataegus) and prickles of Rosa;
storage/perennation: corms (Crocus) stem tubers
(Begonia) and rhizomes (Iris gemanica), climbing:
(Wisteria passiflora);
natural vegetative reproduction: stolons/runners
(Fragaria), rhizomes (Festuca rubra), stem tubers
(Solanum tuberosum).** 


`SPINES (STEM)`
Protective funcrtion of stems.


`THORN`
Protective funcrtion of stems.


`PRICKLE`
Protective funcrtion of stems.


`CORM`
Storage or perennation through stem eg Crocus


`STEM TUBER`
Storage or perennation through  stem tubers – Solanum tuberosum.


`RHIZOME`
Storage or perennation through  rhizomes – Festuca rubra


`Stolon’s or runners`
Fragaria (strawberry)


`see STOLON`
