---
title: Describe the structure and functions of fruits and seeds.
---


> **State the meaning of the term ‘fertilisation’ -
fusion of a male gamete from pollen with a female
gamete in the ovule to produce the embryo.** 


`FERTILISATION`
The fusion of a male gamete from pollen with a female gamete in the ovule to produce the embryo.
Fertilisation is the process where a male nucleus (gamete cell containing a single set of chromosomes “Haploid”) contained in a grain of pollen, joins with the female nucleus (gamete) contained in an ovule in the ovary.  This union forms a cell containing the 2 sets of chromosomes (called a Zygote “Diploid” cell) which will result in a single seed.  The pollen settles on the stigma.  From the pollen grain a tube grows down the style, controlled by the tube cell nucleus, to the ovary entering via the micropile and into an ovule.  Travelling behind the tube nuclei is a generative cell.  Before entering the ovary this divides into 2 haploid sperm cells, each with a single set of chromosomes.  On entering the ovary one cell fuses with the egg cell which forms the new diploid cell and the seed embryo.  The second fuses with the polar nuclei and forms the seed food source (cotyledons) of the seed.


`GAMETE`

`EMBRYO`
Radicle–embryonic root;
Plumule – embryonic shoot;
Hypocotyl – joins root to cotyledon;
Epicotyl – joins shoot to cotyledon;


`CHROMOSOME`

`HAPLOID`

`DIPLOID`

`ZYGOTE`

`POLLEN TUBE`

`MICROPYLE`
small hole, entry point for pollen tube into the ovule for fertilisation, now entry point for water and air into the seed for germination (can induce dormancy by being blocked with wax which can be removed by soaking seed in warm water prior to sowing);


`POLAR NUCLCEI`

`TUBE NUCLEI`

`GENERATIVE CELL`
> **State the meaning of the terms ‘fruit’ and ‘seed’ -
a fruit is formed from the ovary after fertilisation.
A seed is formed from the ovule after fertilisation.** 


`FRUIT`
A fruit is formed from the ovary after fertilisation (an apple).  function of:
Fruit:
Distribution and protection of the seed – may impose dormancy (hormonal):



`SEED`
Seed is formed from the ovule after fertilisation (often enclosed within the fruit, e.g., apple pip). The EMBRYO of a new plant
Natural regeneration of the plant, a means of distribution and protection of the embryo, may impose dormancy (hard seed coat: Lathyrus or immature embryo: Ginkgo), give rise to a new plant.


> **State the function of fruits and seeds - Fruit:
distribution and protection of the seed and may
impose dormancy. Seed: distribution and
protection of the embryo, may impose dormancy,
gives rise to new plants.** 


`FRUIT`
A fruit is formed from the ovary after fertilisation (an apple).  function of:
Fruit:
Distribution and protection of the seed – may impose dormancy (hormonal):



`DEHISCENCE`
 fruit splits open to release the seeds, e.g., Papaver orientalis;


`INDEHISCENCE`
 fruit does not split open, falls off and rots, e.g., nut Quercus robur;


`SUCCULENT FRUIT`
 fruit has a fleshy pericarp when ripe, e.g., drupe Prunus persica peach.


`PERICARP`

`MESOCARP`

`ENDOCARP`

`EXOCARP`

`SILIQUE`

`FALSE FRUIT`
A false fruit is where the fruit forms from the receptacle not the ovary, e.g., Strawberry, or where you have an aggregate of several small fruits, e.g., Raspberry or where a fruit forms with no seeds inside, e.g., Cucumber, a parthenocarpic fruit


`PARTHENOCARPIC`
> **Describe the means by which seeds are
dispersed - wind: (wing, parachute and censer
(papaver)); water*; explosive; animals:
(attachment, scatter hoarding and frugivory).
TWO plant examples for EACH of the above
except where indicated * where only ONE is
required.** 


`SEED DISPERSAL`

`WIND DISPERSAL (SEED)`
Winged seed (Samara):
  Acer
  Fraxinus, Ash
Parachute:
  Taraxacum, Dandelion
  Asclepias curassavica, Milkweed

Seeds shaken from the fruit as the stem moves to and fro in the wind:
  Papaver


  Meconopsis betonicifolia




`WINGED SEED`

`SAMARA`

`WATER DISPERSAL (SEED)`
Iris pseudacorus, Yellow Flag Iris:




`EXPLOSIVE DISPERSAL (SEED)`
Explosive:

Impatiens sultani

Geranium “Johnson’s Blue”


`ANIMAL DISPERSAL (SEED)`
Attachment:
  Arctium lappa, Burdock

  Bidens cernua, Nodding Bur Marigold




`SCATTER HORDING`
Quercus robur, Oak
  Corylus avellana, Hazel nut



`FRUGIVORY DISPERSAL (SEED)`
The fruit is ingested by the animal/moved/excreted and so dispersed away from the parent plant.

Waxwing eating Sorbus fruit:

  Sorbus aucuparia
  Cotoneaster horizontalis
Gravity:
Apple.


> **Describe the internal and external structure of the
seed and state the function of the various parts:
testa, cotyledon, embryo, radicle, plumule,
hypocotyl, epicotyl, endosperm, hilum, micropyle. Examples to be studied to include French bean
(Phaseolus vulgaris) and broad bean (Vicia faba).** 


`SEED STRUCTURE`

`MONOCOT SEED`

`DICOT SEED`

`TESTA`
protective seed coat (may induce dormancy – hard, waxy)


`COTYLEDON`
Cotyledon: seed leaves, 2, food store for the embryo;


`RADICLE`
First part to emerge from the seed, forming the main root. embryonic root


`PLUMULE`
Plumule – embryonic shoot;


`HYPOCOTYL`
Hypocotyl – joins root to cotyledon;


`EPICOTYL`
Epicotyl – joins shoot to cotyledon;


`ENDOSPERM`
Endosperm – food store in monocotyledon seed replacing cotyledon food store in dicotyledonous seed;


`HILUM`
Hilum – attachment scar;


`MICROPYLE`
small hole, entry point for pollen tube into the ovule for fertilisation, now entry point for water and air into the seed for germination (can induce dormancy by being blocked with wax which can be removed by soaking seed in warm water prior to sowing);


`RADICLE`
First part to emerge from the seed, forming the main root. embryonic root


`COLEOPTILE`
Coleoptile – protective sheath over the plumule;


`COLEORHIZA`
Coleorhiza – protective sheath over the radical;


`ALEURONE`
Aleurone – single layer of live cells, very chemically active in the seed and at germination

> **Describe ONE example of epigeal germination
and ONE example of hypogeal germination,
germination of French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris),
and broad bean (Vicia faba).** 


`GERMINATION`

`EPIGEAL GERMINATION`
Epigeal germination: the cotyledons in the seed are raised by the hypocotyl above the soil’s surface; eg. french bean phasoleus vulgaris


`HYPOGEAL GERMINATION`
Hypogeal germination: the cotyledons in the seed remain below the soil surface and the plumule is raised above the soil surface by the epicotyl.

