---
title: Describe how to identify potential hazards and risks on a site, including overhead and underground hazards (e.g. electric cables); unsafe buildings, features and trees; topography and existing features (e.g. watercourses and ponds). Define hazard and risk as used in risk assessments. site topography; unsafe hard landscaping features and garden buildings; trees; areas of water in the garden; overhead and underground services.
---


undefined


`GARDEN SURVEY`

`SITE SURVEY`
see GARDEN SURVEY


`HEALTH AND SAFETY`

`HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE`

`HSE`

`HAZARD`
hazard is something that causes harm,


`RISK`
risk is the likelihood that harm will occur and the severity of it


`ENVIROMENTAL HAZARD`

Existing Features, e.g., Water Courses and Ponds:
Hazard – water/falling in/loose edging;
Risk – drowning;
Water in bubble fountain type features;
Mesh system just under the surface.


`RISK ASSESSMENT`

`OVERHEAD SERVICE`

State why it is necessary to identify the existence of overhead and underground services:
Health and safety issues;
Soil movement/levelling can alter the depth cables are under the ground;
Planning of planting:
Do not plant trees under overhead lines;
Or plant trees over sewage pipes where the roots can enter via damaged pipes and cause pipes to block up.


`UNDERGROUND SERVICE`

State why it is necessary to identify the existence of overhead and underground services:
Health and safety issues;
Soil movement/levelling can alter the depth cables are under the ground;
Planning of planting:
Do not plant trees under overhead lines;
Or plant trees over sewage pipes where the roots can enter via damaged pipes and cause pipes to block up.


`OVERHEAD HAZARD`
Visual Observation:

Wires on Post;

Can come down the pole and then become underground with no access or observation covers.  Hopefully go in a straight line to point when next seen (in house);

Electric/telephone;

Hazard – electricity;

Risk – electrocution;

Danger of electrocution if wire touched;

Carrying metal ladders/irrigation tubes.  In foggy weather high voltage lines can arch/jump;

Climbing ladders/towers;

Lorry’s tipping loads on site;

Inconvenience of bringing down lines and cost of repair;

Mark overhead lines red & white tape.


`UNDERGROUND HAZARD`
Electricity/telephone/Cable TV/water mains/sewage system/surface, rain 




`ELECTRICAL HAZARD`

`UNSAFE BUILDING`
Observation:

Hazards – collapse/falling over/bits falling off;

Risk – injury/death;

Fence off/make safe/pull down.


`UNSAFE TREE`
Unsafe Trees (Professional Inspection/Legal Implication):

Observation:

Weak points/opening splits/trunks oozing/fungal growth;

Hazard – falling limbs/trees/falling leaves and fruit causing slippery surfaces;

Risk of injury to death/trips and slips.


`TOPOGRAPHY`
Shape of the Land
Shape of the Land):
Steep slopes:
Hazard – steepness of the slope;
Risk of slipping down the slope causing grazes or broken bones;
Overcome by terracing with retaining walls, access by winding paths with shallow gradients, steps with hand rails on steps, and use of non-slip surfaces on steeper slopes.


`EXISTING FEATURE`

Existing Features, e.g., Water Courses and Ponds:
Hazard – water/falling in/loose edging;
Risk – drowning;
Water in bubble fountain type features;
Mesh system just under the surface.
State what existing garden features need to be identified, including buildings, hard landscaping features, trees, plants that are to be retained:
Buildings;
Hard landscaping features:
Both can save on cost of rebuilding.
Trees – give size (scale, proportion), shade, maturity, height;
Plants – in general.  Can be rare or good quality cultivars – have memories.  Some plants can be moved, or propagated for use in the garden.


`WATERCOURSE`
