---
title: Describe how the environmental sustainability of landscaping materials may affect choices made during the planning and design stage.
---


> **Environmental sustainability to include:
choice of materials from sustainable sources
and using local sources to reduce transport;
‘reduce, re-use, reclaim, recycle’.** 


`SUSTAINABILITY-(DESIGN)`
Describe how the environmental sustainability of landscaping materials may affect choices made during the planning and design stage.

Check the origin of materials – do not use Indian imported granite sets or Westmorland lime stone pavement, or recycled;
Do not use peat as a soil improver;
Local stone from a sustainable source has cheaper transport cost;
Use local sourced wood (hazel, willow) from worked/coppiced woods for seats, wattle hurdles, etc.;
Use solar powered features, such as water fountains or path lighting.  Specify the use of recycled materials such as rock and bricks (features such as stone seats and statues);
Local might not mean sustainable.



`INDIAN-GRANITE`

`WESTMORLAND LIMESTONE`

`SUSTAINABLE QUARRYING`

`LOCAL SOURCING`

`SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT`

`PEAT SUSTAINABILITY`

Identify the environmental implication of peat in growing media.
In the 1990s the issue was first brought up by the R.S.P.B. as a concern over the loss of wet land habitat for birds.  They were joined by the National Trust and lobbied the government.  It was said that stopping the use of peat in horticulture would be a way to mark the millennium.  Research work started to find suitable alternative materials for making composts.  The National Trust made 3 attempts to develop their own brand of compost (failed) – and the millennium came and went.

The coalition government has brought back the issue as a way of Britain cutting its carbon footprint and the same environmental issues.  They are requesting that local authorities stop the use of peat by 2015, the public stop the use of peat by 2020 and commercial users by 2030.  It is still difficult to find a stable and uniform compost that grows plants easily.


`SCARCE RESOURCES`

`SOLAR LIGHTING`

`SOLAR POND PUMP`

`REDUCE RECYCLE REUSE`
