---
title: Describe the structure and state the functions of flowers.
---


> **State the functions of flowers: to aid pollination, give rise to seeds and fruits.** 


`FLOWER`
contains reproductive parts of the plant.
The Function of Flowers:
To aid pollination, give rise to seeds and fruits.
(Sepals/petals protect the essential parts of the flower, petals aid pollination by attraction).

> **Draw a vertical section of a monocotyledon flower (not grass) and a dicotyledon flower to show where appropriate: receptacle, tepal, sepal, petal, calyx, corolla, nectary, anther, filament, stamen, stigma, style, ovary and ovule.** 






`FLOWER PARTS`

`RECEPTACLE (FLOWER PART)`

`TEPAL`

`SEPAL`

`PETAL`

`CALYX`

`COROLLA`

`NECTARY`

`ANTHER`

`FILAMENT`

`STAMEN`

`STIGMA`

`STYLE (FLOWER PART)`

`OVARY`

`OVULE`
> **State the meaning of ‘monoecious’ and ‘dioecious’ in relation to plants. Know TWO examples of each.** 


`MONOECIOUS`
Both staminate (male) and pistillate (female) flowers occur on the same plant as separate flowers, e.g., corn – Zea mays/cucumber – Curcuma’s natives.


`DIOECIOUS`
Staminate (male) and pistillate (female) flowers occur on separate plants, e.g., Ilex x altaclerensis “Golden King” or Ginkgo biloba:


**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  monoecious

`MALE FLOWER`

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [2] :  dioecious

`STAMINATE`
male-flower (adj.)


`FEMALE FLOWER`

`PISTILLATE`
female-flower (adj.)


`HERMAPHRODITE`
Hermaphrodite:
All the flowers have both male and female in the same flower on the same plant, e.g., many plants:
  Fuchsia “Voodoo”
  Solanum lycopersicum Tomato


> **State the meaning of the term ‘pollination’.** 


`POLLINATION`
The transfer of pollen from an anther to a stigma. wind- insect- and Other forms:
Animals, bats, humming birds, water.



`CROSS POLLINATION`
Cross pollination (which is preferred in nature as it promotes diversity) is where pollen is transferred between different plants of the same species – needed by most Apple cultivars;


`SELF POLLINATION`
Self-pollination is where the pollen from the same flower/plant will fertilise itself, e.g., Apple “Self Fertile Queen Cox” or Cherry “Stella”;


`SELF-INCOMPATIBLE`
Self-incompatible is where the plant will not fertilise with its own pollen, hence the need for cross pollination in most Apple cultivars, e.g., “Cox’s Orange Pippin” is self-incompatible.


`POLLEN`
> **Describe the characteristics of wind and bee pollinated plants - variations in flower structure and pollen.** 


`WIND POLLINATION`
Usually monoecious, with catkin-like male flowers high up in the plant waving in the wind to scatter vast quantities of small, fine, dry pollen;
Female flowers are below the male flowers, very basic structure with no petals but feathery stigma to collect the airborne pollen.



`CATKIN`

`INSECT POLLINATION`
Flowers, often open and flat, pretty/with lines/spotted, producing scent (especially in winter Sarcococca or bad smelling Arum) producing nectar to attract insects to the flower.  Pollen is larger/sticky/rough which tends to stick to the insect.  The stigma is often sticky, large and flat.  The time of flowers opening may coincide with its pollinator – night for moths.  Bees collect nectar and pollen from the flowers for food and in collecting these transfer pollen from anther to stigma and flower to flower.





`NECTAR`
