---
title: Understand botanical and horticultural plant names.
---


> **State the reasons why botanical plant names are
important.
Stability, uniqueness, internationally understood,
confusion over common names allows plant
identification and communication.** 


 - Stability
 - Uniqueness
 - Internationally Understood
 - Avoid confusion over common names
 - Allows plant identification and communication
> **Describe the binomial system of naming plants.
State the meaning of the terms ‘genus’ and
‘species’ and state how they are written, with
reference to THREE plant examples.** 


`BINOMIAL NAME`
A two part scientific name for a plant, made up of a genetic epithet (GENUS) and specific epithet (SPECIES). See also LATIN NAME.


`BINOMIAL SYSTEM`
The system of using BINOMIAL NAMEs to classify plants


`BOTANICAL NAME`
A BINOMIAL NAME


`LATIN NAME`
A BINOMIAL NAME


`GENUS`
A taxonomic rank representing a group of plants with common characteristrics, made up from more than one species.


`SPECIES`
A taxonomic rank under genus, representing a group of plants with common characteristrics taht can reproduce sexually amongst themselves.


 - Italicised OR
 - Underlined
 - Capitalised genus name only
 - Use X for inter-generic hybrids
 - Use x for inter-specific hybrids 

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [3] : 
> **Describe the naming of cultivated plants. State
the meaning of the term cultivar and state how it
is written with reference to three plant examples.** 


International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) is published by International Society for Horticultural Science (ISHS) https://www.ishs.org/
Culitvated Plant Taxonomy Group (HORTAX) http://www.hortax.org.uk/

`CULTIVAR`
A shorterned term meaning Cultivated Variety. 


`CULTIVAR NAME`
A name assigned to a CULTIVATED PLANT (CULTIVAR). Cultivar names are written in single quotation marks following the specific epithet, using capitalised case without emphais (NO italic or underline). When species pareantage is unclear the cultivar name may follow the genus. For fruitsa and vegatble sit is ofen used after the common name.
HOW TO NAME A NEW CULTIVAR
-Piers Trehane, Chairman
 ISHS Commission Nomenclature and Registration
Many of the Rules in the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants
deal with sorting out problems that have arisen in past nomenclature. The
following notes, which are adapted from Appendix VIII of the 1995 Code, are
intended as a quick guide to forming new cultivar names and should be read by
anyone wishing to name a new cultivar.
DO I HAVE A NEW CULTIVAR?
You have a new cultivar and you wish to name it. First check that you do actually
have a cultivar. A single plant is not a cultivar: a cultivar is a group of individual
plants which collectively is distinct from any other, which is uniform in its overall
appearance and which remains stable in its attributes. Do not attempt to name a
cultivar until you have a number of individuals that are uniform and stable. Now
convince yourself that your cultivar is really worth naming; there is no point in
going through the process of naming your cultivar if it is not an improvement on
others.

There are different sorts of cultivar ranging from clones, which should be
genetically identical, to tightly controlled seed-raised cultivars such as F1 hybrids.
Article 2 of the Code defines the different kinds of cultivar.
The only way you can check if your cultivar is new and distinct is by comparison
with existing cultivars. Your new cultivar must be distinguishable from those that
exist or have existed.
Once you are satisfied that you do indeed have a new cultivar, decide if you want
to give it a cultivar name. A name is made up of a botanical name such as that
for a genus or species followed by a cultivar epithet which is the last part of the
entire name and which renders the name unique. Cultivar epithets are always
written within single quotation marks so that they stand out from the rest of the
name and so that their status is obvious.
Remember that cultivar names, by their very definition, are available for all to
use and that the names themselves offer no protection if you wish to obtain
intellectual property rights on your new cultivar.
HOW DO I FORM A NEW CULTIVAR NAME?
The full name of a cultivar will always begin with the name of the genus to which
the cultivar belongs. Optionally, the species or hybrid epithet may be included as
a second element in the entire name but this is not necessary; inclusion of such
epithets merely provides more information about your cultivar. 
Nowadays, new cultivar epithets must be in a modern language and they must be
unique within the so-called denomination class that is usually the genus. Some
groups have special denomination classes and these may be found in Appendix IV
of the Code.
Coining a new and original cultivar name is not easy, especially in groups that
historically have had hundreds or even thousands of cultivars. Luckily many of
these groups have International Cultivar Registration Authorities (ICRAs) who
publish checklists and registers of names which are in use or which have been
used in the past. Check in the Directory of families, genera & species with ICRAs
to see if the genus of your cultivar is covered by an ICRA and then consult the
ICRA's publications. Each ICRA has a registrar who will be glad to advise you if
your proposed name has been used before and whether or not your name is
acceptable.
There have been many other lists of cultivar epithets produced in the past and a
fairly comprehensive list of those is given in Appendix XI of the Code. This list of
Checklists is kept up to date on the WWW at Delaware State University (USA).
Most good horticultural and scientific libraries will have copies of many of these
publications for you to check for prior publication.
Composing an epithet requires a bit of thought. An ideal epithet is both easy to
spell and pronounce in the various countries where the cultivar might be
distributed. The rules for composing an epithet allow you to use or make up any
word or words you want but the epithet will not be allowed as a cultivar epithet if
it is confusing or likely to confuse or if it is contrary to the few provisions listed
below. The Code governs the reasons why a proposed epithet might not be
allowed: disallowed epithets are to be "rejected".
The following is a checklist of things to do when formulating a new name:
(1) Make sure your proposed name is unique and in a modern language e.g. not
in Latin.
(2) Make sure that your name cannot be confused either in spelling or
pronunciation with an existing one.
(3) Make sure that your name could not be interpreted as being likely to
exaggerate the merits of the cultivar (‘Best Ever’, ‘The Greatest’ and ‘Tastiest of
All’ are not acceptable for obvious reasons!)
(4) Make sure that your epithet has no more than 10 syllables and no more than
30 characters, excluding spaces and the single quotation marks.
(5) Make sure that your epithet is not only made up of simple descriptive words
like ‘Red’, ‘Giant White’ or ‘Small’.
(6) Do not use any of the following banned words or their equivalents in any
language in your epithet: "cross", "hybrid", "grex", "group", "form",
"maintenance", "mutant", "seedling", "selection", "sport", "strain", "variety" (or
the plural form of these words in any language) or the words "improved" or
"transformed". 
(7) Do not use any punctuation marks except for the apostrophe, the comma, a
single exclamation mark, the hyphen and the full-stop (period).
(8) If your epithet is a single word, make sure that the word is not the same as
that of a genus, whether in botanical Latin or in a modern language. (Erica,
Daphne, Iris and Veronica happen to be Latin names of genera and are not
permitted as one-word cultivar epithets even though they are personal names as
well. Rose and Violet are common names of genera and they too are not
permitted to stand alone as cultivar epithets. Such a word may be used in an
epithet of two or more words provided that it does not form the final word. (‘Erica
Smith’, ‘Iris Jones’, and ‘Rose Queen’ are acceptable.)
(9) Make sure that your epithet does not contain the botanical or common name
of its genus or the common name of any species in that genus. (Rosa ‘Christmas
Rose’, Potato ‘Jim's Spud’ and Primula ‘White Cowslip’ are not acceptable.)
OTHER NAMING REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the Code's regulations for forming new cultivar names, you should
bear in mind that if a new cultivar is likely to be registered with a statutory plant
registration authority for purposes of say, national listing or plant breeders'
rights, additional conditions are likely to be required before a name
(denomination) is approved by the appropriate authority. Each authority has its
own rules, but the following conditions are often encountered:
(1) Not to incorporate trade marks in a cultivar name unless the applicant is the
trademark owner. ‘Coca-Cola’ and ‘Big Mac’ would not be acceptable.
(2) Apart from in "code names", not to include numbers unless a number is an
integral part of a name. ‘10 Downing Street’, ‘Henry VIII’ and ‘Catch 22’ would be
acceptable, but ‘10th Anniversary’ and ‘No. 66’ might not be.
(3) Not to compose a name with a mixture of upper and lower case letters within
a word unless customary. ‘John McNeill’ would be acceptable but ‘FuNnY FiSh’
might not be.
(4) Not to compose names that resemble terms used in the market place.
‘Twenty Marks’, ‘Two Litres’, and ‘Five Kilos’ might not be acceptable.
(5) Not to use abbreviations of an international organization which is itself
excluded from trade mark protection by international convention. `UNESCO
Dream' `European Union', and `World Bank' might not be acceptable.
(6) Not to use names that might cause offence in the country where a cultivar is
to be marketed. ‘Adolf Hitler’, ‘Little Bastard’, and ‘Catholic Killer’ might not be
acceptable.
(7) Not to use names that might mislead as to the origin of a cultivar. Malus
‘Dear Granny Smith’ might not be acceptable if the cultivar was not derived from,
or related to, the apple ‘Granny Smith’.
Advice on the suitability of a proposed name should be available from the
appropriate statutory authority.
WHAT DO I DO WITH MY NEW NAME?
Once you have satisfied yourself that your name is in an acceptable form,
register it with the appropriate ICRA. This will cost you little more than time 
spent filling in a form and sending it off but will help ensure that the name is
internationally recognized forever.
The name will have to be published in order to be fixed. You may either publish it
yourself, say in your nursery catalogue if you are a nurseryman, or the ICRA
concerned will publish it for you in due course if you register the name with
them. ICRAs however are placed under no obligation to publish your name within
a short period of time and you should realize that your chosen name might be
used by someone else for a completely different plant unless you take steps to
ensure early publication. If someone else, even if in a different part of the world,
publishes your chosen name for a different cultivar in the same genus or other
denomination class, you will have to think of another.

Publication of your new name must be in printed or similarly duplicated matter
which is distributed to the general public or at least to botanical, agricultural,
forestry or horticultural institutions with libraries. Newspapers, gardening or nontechnical magazines and similar publications that are not designed to last do not
count as publications in this case. Publication on the World Wide Web or on CDROM does not count as publication since the pages are not permanent.
Publications must be dated. A new name appearing in a nursery catalogue will
not be treated as having been published if that catalogue is not dated at least to
the year.

Do not publish more than one name for the same cultivar in the same
publication: if you do this none will be considered as having been published in
that publication.
It may be that you are registering or publishing a new cultivar name on behalf of
someone else or that you are promoting a new name for a cultivar raised by
someone else. Check that the originator of the cultivar agrees with the proposed
name (and its spelling) that you are promoting; if the originator does not, the
name may have to be rejected later in favor of the originator's choice.

When you publish a new cultivar name, you must include a description of the
cultivar. The longer and more complete the description the better, but at least
state its obvious characteristics and if you can, state how it differs from an
existing cultivar. It is helpful, but not compulsory, to provide an informative
illustration of the new cultivar in the publication if expense permits.
Make a statement such as "new cultivar name" (not just "new" or "new cultivar")
after the proposed name so that others may recognize the fact that you have
deliberately published a new name for the first time. If you regularly publish new
cultivar names, it would be most advantageous to list any new names appearing
in your publication in a single place in that publication. 
HOW CAN I PROTECT MY NEW NAME?

Send a copy of your publication to the ICRA and to the main horticultural libraries
in your part of the world. If you are feeling generous, send copies to similar
libraries in other parts of the world too.

If you can, distribute herbarium specimens (Standards) of the new cultivar to as
many herbaria as is practical but certainly to your nearest herbarium which
specializes in maintaining Standards (a list is provided in Appendix VI of the
Code), This will help ensure that your cultivar will not become confused with
others in the future and may help resolve disputes if more than one person thinks
they have raised the same cultivar!
Finally, ensure that the name is used by everyone and do not encourage others
to coin trade-designations or other selling names for your plant. The most
effective way to protect a name is to label your plants clearly and
unambiguously. Always maintain "your" cultivar epithet within single quotation
marks to ensure that the status of your plant is understood.
International Society for Horticultural Science
www.ishs.org
© 2002 – ISHS- All rights reserved

`CULTIVATED PLANT`
A result of sexual reproduction. May arise naturally or through deliberate intervention. See PLANT BREEDING.


Written in single quotation marks
Capitalised case without emphais (NO italic or underline)

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [3] : 
