---
title: Describe the routine maintenance of seasonal bedding, including control of weeds and common pests and diseases (aphids, slugs and snails, vine weevil, grey mould, powdery mildew) for the situations listed in 1.3 – 1.7
---


> **Appropriate seasonal maintenance tasks to
include irrigation (hand watering, sprinklers
and drip systems), deadheading, feeding.** 


`IRRIGATION`
Watering plants to ensure water supply at the roots
Water-in plants after planting and when necessary to maintain growth and flowering.  Too much = weeds & little flowers.  Some plants like it drier – Marigolds, Gazania, Geranium.  Some plants like it wetter – Begonia, Fuchsias.

Drought stress is common with newly planted trees and shrubs.  Even in a cool, wet summer, the rain rarely replenishes soil moisture stores fully.  The soil may be dry around the roots even when the surface appears moist;

Dry, windy conditions are especially likely to lead to water shortages.  With experience, it is possible to detect the dull, lifeless foliage indicative of drought stress but by then the tree has already been damaged.  Ideally anticipate water loss, and irrigate to prevent damage.



`HAND WATERING`
Using watering cans


`SPRINKLER IRRIGATION`
using sprinklers


`DRIP FEED IRRIGATION`
use drip feeds


`DEAD HEADING`
Remove spent flowers to encourage blooming. Some sterile F1 HYBRIDs do not require dead heading.


`FEEDING`
Providing plants with additional nutrients to maintain and optimise growth.

> **Methods of weed control to include Physical
(Hand weeding methods) control of pests and
diseases listed for appropriate situations.** 


`WEED CONTROL`
Control of weeds
Can include cultural, biological and chemical methods.

Weeds, lawns and other vegetation intercept water before it reaches the roots of newly planted trees and shrubs;

Keep a vegetation-free circle at least 1.2m (4ft) in diameter around the plant for its first three years to help avoid this problem;

The circle can be kept weed free through hoeing or use of contact or systemic weed-killers;

Laying mulch over this circle is also helpful, although take care to leave a collar of 10cm (4in) around the woody stems that is free of mulch, to prevent the risk of rotting the bark.

`CULTURAL WEED CONTROL`
Control of weeds though cultural methods.
E.g. Hand pulling, weeding

`BIOLOGICAL WEED CONTROL`
Control of weeds through other biological organisms


`HERBICIDE`
Chemical product designed to kill unwanted plants.


`PLANT GROWTH INBITIBITOR`
Chemical product designed to control and limit plant growth rates without killing it.


`CONTACT CHEMICAL WEED CONTROL`
Control of weeds through chemicals which act on contact with foliage.


`SYSTEMIC CHEMICAL WEED CONTROL`
Control of weeds through chemicals are absorbed systemically by a plant.


`PEST CONTROL`
Control of pests.
Can include cultural, biological and chemical methods.

`CULTURAL PEST CONTROL`
Control of pests though cultural methods.
e.g. pruning for air, misting or keeping dry as appropriate, removing bugs by hand

`BIOLOGICAL PEST CONTROL`
Control of pests through other biological organisms
eg NEMATODEs, PARASITIC WASPs

`PESTICIDE`
Chemical product design to kill unwanted living organisms.


`CONTACT CHEMICAL PEST CONTROL`
Control of pests through chemicals which kill the pest on contact.
bug spray!

`SYSTEMIC CHEMICAL PEST CONTROL`
Control of pests through chemicals that are absorbed systemically by a plant the pest is attacking.


`DISEASE CONTROL`
Control of disease
Can include cultural, biological and chemical methods.

`CULTURAL DISEASE CONTROL`
Control of diseases though cultural methods.
eg. hygiene

`BIOLOGICAL DISEASE CONTROL`
Control of diseases through other biological organisms


`FUNGICIDE`
Chemical product design to kill fungii and moulds.


`CONTACT CHEMICAL DISEASE CONTROL`
Control of diseases through chemicals which act on contact with foliage.


`SYSTEMIC CHEMICAL DISEASE CONTROL`
Control of diseases through chemicals are absorbed systemically by a plant.


`WEED`
unwanted plant


`APHID`
Greenfly etc. Sap sucker


`SLUG`
eats leaves


`SNAIL`
eats leaves


`VINE WEEVIL`
adults eat leaves and larvae eat stems and roots.


beneficial-insect

`LADYBIRD`
A familar type of beetle which is beneficial in controlling desctructive pests.


`PARASITIC WASP`
A natural predator for pests used as a biological control method


`NEMATODE`
A small worm. A natural predator for pests used as a biological control method


`LACEWING`
Benefial flying insect


`MOULD`

`GREY MOULD`
A fungal disease in wet seasons.  Attacks leaves and stems.
Remove damaged leaves and plants and spray with systemic fungicide.  Avoid overcrowding foliage / plants

`POWDERY MILDEW`
A fungal disease encouraged by overcrowding and lack of soil moisture.
Remove damaged leaves and plants and spray with systemic fungicide.  Water regularly.  Westland Plant Rescue Control.
> **Control of ONE appropriate weed, pest and
disease for each situation.** 


[Capsella bursa-pastoris]

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [1]  (PEST):  pest

**MISSING EXAMPLES**
GIVE_EXAMPLES [1]  (DISEASE):  disease
