---
title: Describe the main characteristics of a knot garden, a landscape garden and a cottage garden.
---


> **To include the typical hard and soft
landscaping features of a knot garden
(clipped hedges, shapes, infill, pattern); a
landscape garden (English landscape
garden, borrowed views, serpentine lakes,
Palladian bridges, ha has, temples, follies,
grottos, hermitages, Chinese bridges and
pagodas); and a cottage garden (annuals and
‘easy’ perennials, vegetables, gravel paths,
brick edging, picket fences).** 


`KNOT GARDEN`
A garden or garden area containing an interlocking or intertwining pattern using clipped Box, Buxus sempervirens, which is designed to be viewed from above.  The areas produced can be gravelled (often coloured) or planted.


`LANDSCAPE GARDEN`
One with extensive views of parkland with the use of “Ha Ha” walls to enhance unobtrusive views, as well as including designed blocks of woodland, serpentine lakes, palladium bridges and gothic follies. Boundaries are often hidden Ha Ha walls, or in woodlands or over hills.


`ENGLISH LANDSCAPE GARDEN`

`BORROWED VIEW`

`HA HA`
A ha-ha is a recessed landscape design element that creates a vertical barrier while preserving an uninterrupted view of the landscape beyond. The design includes a turfed incline which slopes downward to a sharply vertical face, typically a masonry retaining wall.


`SERPENTINE LAKE`
A serpentine shape is any of certain curved shapes of an object or design, which are suggestive of the shape of a snake (the adjective "serpentine" is derived from the word serpent).


`PALLADIAN BRIDGE`
Palladianism is, loosely, a philosophy of design based on the writings and work of Andreas Palladio, an Italian architect of the 16th century who tried to recreate the style and proportions of the buildings of ancient Rome.
What characterizes English Palladian architecture? In a nutshell, grace, understated decorative elements, and use of classical orders. At its most rigid, Palladianism simply copied designs made popular in Italy by Palladio.
https://www.britainexpress.com/architecture/palladian.htm

`CHINESE BRIDGE`

`PAGODA`

`FOLLY`

`GOTHIC FOLLY`

`HERMITAGE`
A hermitage can be two things. In early Christianity, a hermitage was a place where religious men lived on their own to escape the temptations of the world. These retreats were caves or small buildings in deserts, mountains, forests or on islands. In eighteenth-century landscape gardens a hermitage was also a retreat, but for its aristocratic owners to rest in on their walks. These hermitages were also used as eye-catchers in the landscape.


https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/features/what-is-a-hermitage

`COTTAGE GARDEN`
One with an informal design incorporating a profusion of ornamental and edible plants, frequently intermingled with close planting of borders and little or no use of lawns (grass or gravel paths):
Plants give a wide range of interest including scent and vibrant colour;
Use of local and natural sources of material for walls and paths;
Containing structures such as, rustic wood arbours, wooden obelisks or seats, willow structures and pergolas made from wood, stone or brick;
Often enclosed with visible walls/fences.




`COTTAGE STYLE`

`POTAGER`
