---
title: Describe TWO hazards associated with EACH of the following: access, slope, location of features, water, electricity, materials, plants.
---


> **Slopes to include inclines on grass, ramps,
steps.** 


Slopes to include inclines on grass, ramps, steps.{: .notice--warning}

> **Exemplar:
Hazards of materials to include splinters,
sharp edges (possible limitation of re-used,
reclaimed and recycled materials), slippery
surfaces.
Hazards of construction not required.** 


Where a pathway under trees which is dark is a potential hazard (trips and slips);

Plant material/walls obstructing “lines of sight” coming out onto roads (causing poor visibility).

Hazard – steepness of the slope;

Risk of slipping down the slope causing grazes or broken bones.

Ponds – as a feature in themselves possess a hazard/risk (water and drowning);

Water – drowning; sprinklers systems/drift of water spray from fountains making paths slippery; puddles freezing in winter/slippery;

Electrocution if cable cut while digging or cut when using a hedge cutter.  Water and electricity do not mix.  Dropping equipment in pond.  All wiring or installing of electrical equipment should be done professionally.

Wood – hazards – splinters; features falling as wood rots, and under the weight of plants; becoming slippery with the growth of algae on decking causing injury;
Stone or glass (being abrasive if fallen onto, causing injury);
Non porous materials for paths or patios, causing puddles (slips and injury).


Toxic sap, thorns, spikes, hairs causing allergic reaction and poisonous seeds.
