---
title: Describe the structure and state the functions of roots.
---


> **State the primary functions of the root -
anchorage, water and mineral uptake.** 


`ROOT`

Anchorage – holds the plant in the ground.
Water and mineral uptake.

Monocots only have a fibrous root system (adventitious arising from nodes on the stem), they do not branch or produce secondary thickening.
Dicots have a tap root system (developing from the radicle) they branch and produce secondary thickening.


`ROOT UPTAKE`
> **Describe root types -  ‘tap’, ‘lateral’, ‘fibrous’ and
‘adventitious’, to include the origin of each type
e.g. tap root from radicle, adventitious roots from
stem.** 


`TAP ROOT`
Primary root – first root, origin from the radicle (tap root of tree/or biennial, e.g., carrot).



`LATERAL ROOT`
Secondary/lateral – roots coming off the primary root producing the mass of the root system for anchorage, water absorption and mineral uptake.


`FIBROUS ROOT`
The root system of monocotyledonous plant arising from the central apex of the plant.  Straight growing, not normally able to branch.


`ADVENTITIOUS ROOT`
Roots coming off any other part of the plant other than the primary root system.  Origin – off stems/stolen/aerial/from cuttings.
Some plants produce adventitious roots off their stems which cling onto rough surfaces, allowing the plant to grow up the surface as a climbing plant, e.g., Hedera helix.

`RADICLE`
First part to emerge from the seed, forming the main root. embryonic root

> **Describe the difference between monocotyledon
and dicotyledon roots.** 


`MONOCOT ROOT`

`DICOT ROOT`

undefined
> **Describe the structure of the root and state the
function of its components - internal and external
structures to include drawings of transverse and
longitudinal sections through a young dicotyledon
root to show the following components: root cap,
apical meristem, zone of elongation, zone of
differentiation, root hairs, epidermis, cortex,
endodermis, pericycle, phloem, xylem and
cambium.** 


`ROOT GROWTH`

`ROOT CAP`

Protection and lubricates the root.
May inhibit the roots of other plants.
Influences ion uptake.
Attracts beneficial soil micro-organisms.
Glues soil particles to the root so improving the soil/plant contact.
Protects the root cells from drying out.
Physically protects the root meristem.


`ROOT HAIR`
Root hairs – produce a vast surface area for water and mineral uptake.


`CORTEX`
See Root Cortex & STEM CORTEX


`ROOT CORTEX`
Packing and connective cells.
Stores starch and produces energy (respiration).



`ENDODERMIS`
Protection of inner vascular bundle.
Controls water and mineral uptake.



`PERICYCLE`
Gives rise to lateral roots.


undefined

undefined
> **Describe how the root is adapted to perform other
functions - storage/perennation, tap root (Daucus)
and root tuber (Dahlia), climbing (Hedera) and
support/prop (Zea).** 


`PERENNATION`
Tap root stores food, mostly as sugars and takes the plant over the winter.  In spring the plant produces a flowering shoot, Daucus carota subsp. sativus.


`PERENNATING ORGAN`

`TUBER`
Root tuber plant stores food in swollen root tubers, e.g., Dahlia variabilis. Plant regrows from buds on the base of the stem.  Tubers have no buds.


`ROOT ANCHORAGE`
Prop roots – some plants produce adventitious roots off their stems which grow down into the soil so supporting tall plant, e.g., Zea mays.

