---
title: Describe the soil or growing media preparation, sowing (H.A border) or planting out of plants for seasonal display for the situations listed in 1.3 – 1.7.
---


> **Seasonal displays to include Spring bedding,
Summer bedding & Hardy Annual borders.
To include::
the preparation of annual borders and
seasonal bedding displays (removal of
previous bedding, soil cultivation, marking
out, sowing methods for HA to include Station
sowing, Drills and Broadcasting, thinning and
planting); growing media, liners and additives
for hanging baskets and containers; choice of
container; filling and planting of hanging
baskets and containers (depth, spacing).
Watering.** 


`SOWING`
Germinating seed in media.
From King Henry's Walk Garden:
## Sowing indoors
* Use sterilized compost and clean pots. 
* Water the compost well before sowing. 
* Sow thinly and not too deeply – this is the commonest cause of failure. 
* Follow the directions on the packet. If
there are no directions, a rough guide is two-and-a-half-times the depth of the seed.
Fine seed, like carrot, is easier to sow evenly if you mix it with silver sand. Scatter the seed as
thinly as you can on the surface and sieve some fine compost on top.
Cover the seeds with clingfilm, glass or a black plastic sack. They will be kept moist by
condensation and shouldn’t need to be watered again until the seeds have germinated. Keep
them in the dark in the airing cupboard or in another warm place. Check every day.
As soon as you see signs of life, take off the covers and get them into the light, but out of direct
sunlight. Keep some water at room temperature for them, but avoid overwatering them as they
could ‘dampen off’. Though generally rain water is recommended for plants, for seedlings tap
water is safer. If they are on a window sill, turn them every day or put them in a box lined with
kitchen foil to reflect light around the young plants.
## Pricking out
Don’t hurry this! Aim to be efficient to minimize the time they are out of the soil. Water them
well ahead of time. Have ready some containers filled with compost with holes made with a
dibber (pencil, plant label, lollipop stick or chopstick) ready to receive them. Ease out the
seedlings with a dibber taking as much compost with them as possible to avoid damaging the
roots and to prevent them drying out. If you need to handle the seedlings or support them, don’t
touch the stems as they are easily broken, just the leaves. Plant them so that the first set of
leaves is just above the surface of the compost. Firm them down carefully and water.
## Hardening off
Prepare the young plants for the outside world in stages. Be patient and wait until the weather
is really set fair. Put them out under cloches, fleece or in the cold frame. If you keep them in
their pots for the first few weeks they are easy to move indoors if there is an unexpected cold
snap. Alternatively cover them with thick newspaper if you expect a frosty night – removing it
in the morning. On fine days take off the crop covers and put them back on at night, until you
are sure that the young plants have acclimatized.
## Planting out
When they are ready to go out into the ground, water them well before moving them from their
pots. Plant them to the same level as before. An exception to this rule is leeks which are
planted more deeply to keep them blanched. Water again carefully to get rid of any air pockets.
## Sowing outdoors
Prepare the beds carefully. Clear away all weeds and stones. Work the soil to a fine tilth by
moving the rake across and then lengthways over and over again until the soil is flat and
smooth and has the texture of fine breadcrumbs. The finer the seed that you plan to sow, the
finer the tilth should be. When you are satisfied, firm the soil with the back of the rake.
## Drills
Drills are trenches that are used for sowing most vegetable seed. They can be a narrow ‘V’
shape for fine seed made by the corner of a hoe, or wide enough for two lines of seeds made
with the full width of the hoe. Some gardeners tread on a stick instead to make a low
indentation. The seed is sown in straight lines or geometric patterns so that the gardener can
discern what is weed and what is seed. Use pegs or skewers and string to give you a guideline,
then make a drill with a corner of the hoe or a stick. Be careful not to make it too deep. Water
the trench before sowing the seed. One way is to sprinkle the seed into the palm of one hand
and take pinches with the other to sow as thinly as you can. Another is to tip it slowly out of a
folded piece of paper. If the seed is very fine, mix it with silver sand or a little compost. Cover
the trench, taking care not to bury the seed too deeply. Mark the spot and label it (golden rule).
## Station sowing
Station sowing is for larger seeds like broad beans and peas. Prepare the ground in the same
way but instead of making a drill, make holes at the appropriate distances along the line. Often
peas and beans are sown in a staggered double row. Drop the seeds into the holes one by one. It
is customary to sow three seeds per station – one for you, one for the birds, and one for luck.
## Broadcasting
This is used for a carpet covering, a lawn, a wildflower meadow or green manure. Once the
beds are prepared, the seed is sown by scattering it. Usually the best method is to walk up the
bed and then across it using a wide sweep of the arm.
## Pre-germinating seed*
This is a useful technique for getting tricky seeds like parsnip to germinate quickly and also to
test whether old seed is still ‘viable’ or alive.
Scatter a few seeds on a sopping wet kitchen towel, cover them with a plastic bag and put them
in a dark warm place like the airing cupboard. Watch them carefully over the next few days as
you want to catch them when they are embryonic, just putting out almost invisible roots and
shoots. If you leave them too long they are very vulnerable to damage.
Fluid sowing
This is a commercial technique useful for ‘difficult’ seeds but it can easily be adapted to home
use.
## Pre-germinate as above.*
Rinse the seeds off carefully in a sieve. Mix up a carrier gel of water-retaining granules
(available at garden centres). Drop a few seeds into the mixture with the tip of a plant label or
tweezers. If they sink, the gel needs to be thicker. When you have the right viscosity and there
are plenty of seeds in the mix, put it in a heavy weight plastic bag. Cut off the corner and
squeeze out the mixture into a prepared trench – rather like icing a cake for giants.
Thinning
## Thinning seeds is essential to give your plants the best chance of developing well. Check on
your planting distances and be ruthless. If you are careful, sometimes the thinnings can be
transplanted or (like carrots) be eaten.
Types of seed
## Treated seeds
### Pelleted seed. This is a helpful treatment for tiny seeds – some come as fine as dust. Each seed
comes as a small ball coated with an inert protective material, so that it is easy to handle and
sow. It is important to keep the soil comfortably moist so that the pellet can gradually dissolve.
### Seed tapes. The fool proof way to sow. Seeds are embedded in soluble tape, perfectly spaced.
So they just need to be laid on the soil and covered in the usual way.
Chitted and pre-germinated seed. The seeds are despatched when they are just germinated
with microscopic roots and shoots. This can be a useful shortcut. However, it is easy to pregerminate your own seeds.*
### Primed seed. The seed is brought almost (but not quite) to the point of germination to give it a
head start. This is helpful with ‘difficult’ seeds – ones that germinate slowly or erratically –
e.g. carrot, parsnip, onion and parsley.
Dressed and treated seed is to be avoided by organic gardeners as the seeds are treated with
chemicals.
F1 hybrids
F1 hybrids (the first filial generation, or ‘Filial 1’) are made by crossing two distinct parent
lines. The aim is to achieve the virtues of both. Most new vegetable varieties are F1 hybrids.
The advantages are exceptional quality, uniformity, reliability, vigour, and often inbuilt disease
resistance. They are to be highly recommended. The only drawbacks are that they don’t come
true from seed and they are more expensive.
Award of Garden Merit
Seeds that have the AGM have been vigorously tested by the Royal Horticultural Society for
excellence for ordinary garden use, are readily available, have a good constitution, do not need
specialist care and are not susceptible to disease. It is always worth looking out for the AGM
sign (a little trophy cup). The full list can be downloaded from

`STATION SOWING`
Method for sowing larger seeds in holes at regular spaces, usually 2 or 3 per hole. Also called SPACE SOWING. Compare DRILL SOWING
This is a good way to sow seed economically, since less thinning will be needed after the seeds germinate.

Station sowing is for larger seeds like broad beans and peas. Prepare the ground in the same
way but instead of making a drill, make holes at the appropriate distances along the line. Often
peas and beans are sown in a staggered double row. Drop the seeds into the holes one by one. It
is customary to sow three seeds per station – one for you, one for the birds, and one for luck.

Sow two or three seeds every few centimentres or where one final plant is intended. The easiest way to do this is by marking out a grid pattern and sowing the seed at the ‘stations’ where the rows cross
Once the seeds have come up, choose the healthiest and ‘thin out’ the others

`DRILL SOWING`
Method for sowing seeds in shallow trenches, usually in straight lines or geometric patterns so that the gardener can
discern what is weed and what is seed.
 Use pegs or skewers and string to give you a guideline,
then make a drill with a corner of the hoe or a stick. Be careful not to make it too deep. Water
the trench before sowing the seed. One way is to sprinkle the seed into the palm of one hand
and take pinches with the other to sow as thinly as you can. Another is to tip it slowly out of a
folded piece of paper. If the seed is very fine, mix it with silver sand or a little compost. Cover
the trench, taking care not to bury the seed too deeply. Mark the spot and label it (golden rule).

`BROADCAST SOWING`
Method of sowing seeds over a wide range by scattering.
This is used for a carpet covering, a lawn, a wildflower meadow or green manure. Once the
beds are prepared, the seed is sown by scattering it. Usually the best method is to walk up the
bed and then across it using a wide sweep of the arm

`SEED THINNING`
Removing seedlings to reduce competition and allow space for others to develop better.
When seedlings have grown their first true leaves (that resemble those of the adult plant, not seed leaves), pinch off the tops of the weakest seedlings at ground level or, better still, remove entire seedlings
The ideal spacings for each vegetable vary, but will be indicated on the seed pa

`PLANTING OUT`

winter-container

winter-container


Winter – dig to allow for good weathering to produce a good tilth for direct sowing (do not apply manure – too rich a soil gives lush growth at the expense of flowers).
Spring – late March / April, when soil is moist, warm and workable – fork, remove weeds, rough rake, tread, rake level, raise the tilth (apply light feed of general fertiliser if needed) stale seedbed technique. 

* Mark out bed in rounded shapes are for each plant to be 
* (Seed can be scattered??).  
* Take out drills in changing directions (spacing and depth to suit). 
* Sow seeds thinly, or station sow, and cover (Nasturtium  plant / station sow seed – 15 cm).  
* Protect from birds, slugs and snails.  
* On good germination, thin seedlings in stages as required.

Strip out spring flowering bedding late May;

Quickly dig over bed (ideally manured in autumn);

Quick change over from spring to summer flowers;

Secondary cultivations / form bed;

Plant standards;

Plant dots;

Plant edging (straight) using a trowel in good size holds at a depth equal to the root ball size;

Lay out groundwork over all areas, avoid straight lines;

Start planting in centre of bed, working back to edge.  Keep pots tidy, take out footprints as you go;

Water in to help firm plants and wash off soil.

October / November strip out summer bedding (propagate, save plants);

Dig beds as required (the best time to add well-rotted compost or manure).  Some plants like Erysimum are grass feeders;

As plants going in area usually green, you can take your time in preparing; 

Rough rake, tread, rake level, fine tilth not required;

Planting – often no standards (evergreen shrubs):

Plant edging (Bellis);

Plant groundwork (Wallflowers);

Plant Tulips between Wallflowers;

Water in even if soil moist.

Compost which you are happy with – peat, peat free, JI2.  Baskets need a light compost;

For summer use, can be improved by the addition of a slow release feed, such as Osmocote 4 Month, and a water retaining polimer (water gel).

** ANSWER NEEDED **

Free draining, as for summer-container, but moisture retentive
moist
free of pests and diseases
not too heavy for basket
heavier for containers (stability)
suitable pH (below 6 for acid loving plants, able to hold nutrients).

** ANSWER NEEDED **
